Explore Embedded CAD Objects in Your Browser With Sketchfab
BY JOSEPH FLAHERTYEMAIL AUTHOR10.05.123:20 PM


The site hosts designs for sports cars and shadow demons. That’s range.
While 3D-modeling software is used to design everything from sports cars to mind-blowing models for video games, casual CAD-viewing tools tend to have the visual appeal of a tax form. They’re often dated and confusing, keeping CAD from more mainstream adoption.

A new tool, however, aims to fix that. Called Sketchfab, it is a browser-embedded gallery that lets viewers fully explore 3-D models.

Cédric Pinson, a software engineer and Alban Denoyel, an MBA with a background in photojournalism created Sketchfab to be to 3-D graphics what Dribbble is to designer’s products. While dozens of sites let 3-D modelers display their wares, they tend to only show static screen caps. With Sketchfab, the viewer can actually interact with models in real time.



Pinson started work on the site two years ago in conjunction with the release of the WebGL standard. With 12 years of experience in the 3-D industry, his instincts led him to believe it would become the dominant way to display 3-D models online. Denoyel joined shortly thereafter and says ”I believe 3-D is the next big media, after photos and videos.”

The site has a distinct, minimal style and the UI takes a back seat to the interactive views of the model. Visitors can pan, zoom, and rotate objects, and of course leave feedback in the form of likes or comments. Sketchfab supports uploads from the major modeling programs; 3DS Max, Maya, Blender, and Solidworks are all supported.

They’re also looking to expand their presence beyond their site with options for embedding, a WordPress plugin, and an API that will allow app developers to embed their service. A basic account is free, but storing more than ten models will cost nine Euros a month.


Explore 3-D models in detail, right from your browser.
Denoyel thinks Sketchfab fills a unique space in the market. He says “Thingiverse is a repository of printable 3D files, GrabCAD is a community and repository of CAD files, targeting engineers. Sketchfab focuses on the display: we want to be able to display any 3D model online as well as on a 3D software.”

The product is ambitious, but its newness creates some deficiencies. The site is slow to load, understandable given the size and complexity of some of these models, but noticeable in an age of super-responsive sites and apps. And if you don’t have WebGL enabled, you won’t be able to interact with the pieces.

The duo’s short-term goal is to create the best portfolio site available for 3-D designers, but they are keeping their eyes on the rapid development of 3-D printers and scanners. Denoyel says “We’ll probably add a download option if the person who uploaded wants to, and will also add a 3D print option in partnership with a 3D printer.”